manage user creds (#5680)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/concepts/manage-user-creds/index.md

An [authorization server](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/) mints OpenID Connect (OIDC) or OAuth 2.0 tokens. It applies access policies that determine who can be issued a token and what scopes that token can have. Conversely, the resource server applies access policies to decide which tokens and scopes it accepts in exchange for access to specific resources.

Okta supports two types of authorization servers:

* The [org authorization server](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/#org-authorization-server) is built in and supports simple SSO for OIDC apps or for obtaining access tokens for Okta APIs. It doesn't support custom scopes, claims, or policies.
* A [custom authorization server](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/#custom-authorization-server) allows you to create and apply authorization policies to secure your own APIs. You can also define custom scopes and claims, and integrate with API gateways. It's recommended to assign one authorization server per API product to maintain separate policies and token expiration times, and to prevent scope name collisions.

> ## Why secure token management is critical

Reviewer: This is great stuff, the crux of the doc

  * CSRF allows attackers to trick an authenticated browser into making unintended requests.
* Concurrency issues: Managing tokens involves storage, retrieval, and refresh operations. In complex apps, especially during initialization or with concurrent operations, multiple calls to token storage can lead to shared resource contention.
* Lack of granular control and scope restrictions: If tokens aren't scoped appropriately, any security compromise can lead to broader unauthorized access to resources, increasing the potential damage. Defining granular and specific scopes within authorization servers is a best practice.
* Insecure token transmission: All interactions and redirects involving users, apps, and Okta must be secured through HTTPS (SSL/TLS) connections to protect credentials and tokens from interception. Pass access tokens exclusively through an HTTP Authorization header. Also, never encode tokens into a payload or URL, as these could be logged or cached.
<!-- [For later: The Okta Client SDK's token management system is designed to mitigate these issues and ensure app stability.] -->

> ### Token lifecycle

Reviewer: This section seems dropped in .... it's confusing in the flow why'd we jump to this. Perhaps needs an introductory paragraph to understand the mgmt aspects behind the lifecycle

* Validation: You can validate access tokens either locally (by verifying the JWT signature using JWKS public keys) or through introspection endpoints provided by your custom authorization server. Okta recommends using dynamic retrieval and caching of JWKS for performance, with periodic checks for updates and a failsafe for rapid key regeneration.

## Manage the user credential lifecycle

For apps, the choice of token storage strategy and sign-in model significantly impacts security and user experience.

### Token storage

There are several models that you can use to manage tokens in your app:

* Front channel OAuth model
* Backend For Frontend (BFF)
* Demonstrating Proof of Possession (DPoP)

The optimal choice depends on the required levels of access control and the desired scalability of your app.

#### Front channel OAuth model

> In a front-channel OAuth model, the app handles all authentication directly, and security tokens are stored in cookies, browser storage, or computer memory.

Reviewer: This is the first mention of "security token" .... unless this is a granular thing outside of access/ID tokens, I suggest we use the access/ID token. If "security token" is a correct term, we should define it clearly.

* The client needs a secure way to generate, store, and manage the private key. If the private key is compromised, the security of DPoP is defeated. Again, The Okta [SDKs](/code/#sign-a-user-in-from-a-web-app) can handle this complexity.

While using in-memory storage for access tokens and cookies for refresh tokens is a standard practice for apps, the BFF and DPoP models offer more robust protection against common threats like token theft and XSS. These models centralize security logic on a server or cryptographically bind tokens to a specific client.

### Sign-in models

There are different architectural approaches for user authentication. You can choose between hosted Okta solutions for simplicity and security (the redirect model) or building highly customized experiences with direct API integration (embedded model). This enables you to align your authentication flow with specific app requirements and branding needs.

#### Redirect sign-in model

> Okta recommends using a federation-based model like [OIDC](https://developer.okta.com/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/), where the end-user's browser is [redirected](/docs/concepts/redirect-vs-embedded/#redirect-authentication) to an Okta-hosted sign-in page for apps.

Reviewer: I think we can remove link (OIDC) here to lesson the noise

---
title: Manage user credentials for your apps
meta:
  - name: description
    content: Learn about user credentials and securely managing them
---

# Manage user credentials for your apps

> Securely managing your tokens is essential to mitigate risks that directly threaten the protection of user data, such as token theft and account takeover.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Securely managing your tokens is essential to mitigating risks that directly threaten user data, such as token theft and account takeover.
```

## Terms

* [Authorization server](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/): A server that mints OpenID Connect (OIDC) or OAuth 2.0 tokens. It applies access policies that determine who can be issued a token and what scopes that token can have. Conversely, the resource server applies access policies to decide which tokens and scopes it accepts in exchange for access to specific resources.

  Okta supports two types of authorization servers:

  * [Org authorization server](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/#org-authorization-server): A built-in server that supports simple SSO for OIDC apps or for obtaining access tokens for Okta APIs. It doesn't support custom scopes, claims, or policies.

>   * [Custom authorization server](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/#custom-authorization-server): A server that allows you to create and apply authorization policies to secure your own APIs. You can also define custom scopes and claims, and integrate with API gateways. It's recommended to assign one authorization server per API product to maintain separate policies and token expiration times, and to prevent scope name collisions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * [Custom authorization server](/docs/concepts/auth-servers/#custom-authorization-server): A server that allows you to create and apply authorization policies to secure your own APIs. You can also define custom scopes and claims, and integrate with API gateways. Okta recommends assigning one authorization server per API product to maintain separate policies and token expiration times, and to prevent scope name collisions.
```

* [Authenticator](/docs/guides/authenticators-overview/main/): The mechanism for the user to present their credentials to the identity provider (IdP) for verification. For example, a user might use a smart phone with an authenticator app or a biometric fingerprint reader.

* OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect (OIDC): The foundational standards for how Okta issues and manages user tokens. These protocols define how authentication and authorization are handled within your apps. For a detailed conceptual breakdown of OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect, see the [OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect overview](/docs/concepts/oauth-openid/).

* Tokens: Digital credentials issued by the IdP. They contain information about the user's identity and grant access to a resource or service without requiring the user to re-enter their credentials:

>   * [ID token](/docs/concepts/token-lifecycles/#id-tokens): A JSON Web Token (JWT) granted by the OIDC provider. It serves to prove a user's identity and contains claims about the authenticated user, such as their name, email, or a unique identifier. This token is primarily intended for the client app to identify the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * [ID token](/docs/concepts/token-lifecycles/#id-tokens): A JSON Web Token (JWT) granted by the OIDC provider. It proves a user's identity and contains claims about the authenticated user, such as their name, email, or a unique identifier. This token is primarily intended for the client app to identify the user.
```

  * [Refresh tokens](/docs/guides/refresh-tokens/main/): Opaque tokens that are used to obtain new ID and access tokens without requiring the user to reauthenticate. These tokens are crucial for maintaining user sessions with minimal impact to the user experience.

  > **Note**: For a detailed description of the different types of tokens, see [Understand the token lifecycle (exchange, refresh, revoke)](/docs/concepts/token-lifecycles/).

* User credentials: The data or information that a user provides to verify their identity. Credentials can be broken down into three categories:

  * Something the user knows: This is a memorized secret, such as a PIN, or a username and password.
  * Something the user has: A physical or digital object in their possession. For example, a one-time passcode sent through SMS or a code from an authenticator app, such as Okta Verify.
  * Something the user is: A unique biometric identifier, such as a fingerprint or a facial scan.

## Why secure token management is critical

> Securely managing your tokens is essential to mitigate risks that directly threaten the protection of user data, such as token theft and account takeover.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Securely managing your tokens is essential to mitigating risks that directly threaten user data, such as token theft and account takeover.
```

## Manage the user credential lifecycle

For apps, the choice of token storage strategy and sign-in model significantly impacts security and user experience.

### Token storage

There are several models that you can use to manage tokens in your app:

* Front channel OAuth model
* Backend For Frontend (BFF)
* Demonstrating Proof of Possession (DPoP)

The optimal choice depends on the required levels of access control and the desired scalability of your app.

#### Front channel OAuth model

In a front-channel OAuth model, the app handles all authentication directly, and tokens are stored in cookies, browser storage, or computer memory.

In this model, the token lifecycle is as follows:

1. Authenticate: The user enters their credentials (such as a username and password) or uses social sign-in. The app uses a client-side library to interact with an identity provider (IdP) to get a security token.

> 1. Store tokens after sign-in: After a user successfully authenticates, the app receives an access token. You can store the token in browser storage (local storage or session storage) or in-memory (as a JavaScript variable).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Store tokens after sign-in: After a user authenticates, the app receives an access token. You can store the token in browser storage (local storage or session storage) or in-memory (as a JavaScript variable).
```
